<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
			<p>In that enormous silence, where pain and darkness met, some birds were waking. It was October. It was almost four o’clock in the morning. Eliza straightened out Ben’s limbs, and folded his hands across his body. She smoothed out the rumpled covers of the bed, and patted out the pillows, making a smooth hollow for his head to rest in. His flashing hair, cropped close to his well-shaped head, was crisp and crinkly as a boy’s, and shone with bright points of light. With a pair of scissors, she snipped off a little lock where it would not show.</p>
			<p>“Grover’s was black as a raven’s without a kink in it. You’d never have known they were twins,” she said.</p>
			<p>They went downstairs to the kitchen.</p>
			<p>“Well, Eliza,” said Gant, calling her by name for the first time in thirty years, “you’ve had a hard life. If I’d acted different, we might have got along together. Let’s try to make the most of what time’s left. Nobody is blaming you. Taking it all in all, you’ve done pretty well.”</p>
			<p>“There are a great many things I’d like to do over again,” said Eliza gravely. She shook her head. “We never know.”</p>
			<p>“We’ll talk about it some other time,” said Helen. “I guess everyone is worn out. I know I am. I’m going to get some sleep. Papa, go on to bed, in heaven’s name! There’s nothing you can do now. Mama, I think you’d better go, too⁠—”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Eliza, shaking her head. “You children go on. I couldn’t sleep now anyway. There are too many things to do. I’m going to call up John Hines now.”</p>
			<p>“Tell him,” said Gant, “to spare no expense. I’ll foot the bills.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Helen, “whatever it costs, let’s give Ben a good funeral. It’s the last thing we can ever do for him. I want to have no regrets on that score.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Eliza, nodding slowly. “I want the best one that money will buy. I’ll make arrangements with John Hines when I talk to him. You children go on to bed now.”</p>
			<p>“Poor old ’Gene,” said Helen, laughing. “He looks like the last rose of summer. He’s worn out. You pile in and get some sleep, honey.”</p>
			<p>“No,” he said, “I’m hungry. I haven’t had anything to eat since I left the university.”</p>
			<p>“Well, for G-G-G-God’s sake!” Luke stuttered. “Why didn’t you speak, idiot? I’d have got you something. Come on,” he said, grinning. “I wouldn’t mind a bite myself. Let’s go uptown and eat.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Eugene. “I’d like to get out for a while from the bosom of the family circle.”</p>
			<p>They laughed crazily. He poked around the stove for a moment, peering into the oven.</p>
			<p>“Huh? Hah? What are you after, boy?” said Eliza suspiciously.</p>
			<p>“What you got good to eat, Miss Eliza?” he said, leering crazily at her. He looked at the sailor: they burst into loud idiot laughter, pronging each other in the ribs. Eugene picked up a coffeepot half-filled with a cold weak wash, and sniffed at it.</p>
			<p>“By God!” he said. “That’s one thing Ben’s out of. He won’t have to drink mama’s coffee any more.”</p>
			<p>“Whah-whah-whah!” said the sailor.</p>
			<p>Gant grinned, wetting a thumb.</p>
			<p>“You ought to be ashamed of yourself,” said Helen, with a hoarse snigger. “Poor old Ben!”</p>
			<p>“Why, what’s wrong with that coffee?” said Eliza, vexed. “It’s <em>good</em> coffee.”</p>
			<p>They howled. Eliza pursed her lips for a moment.</p>
			<p>“I don’t like that way of talking, boy,” she said. Her eyes blurred suddenly. Eugene seized her rough hand and kissed it.</p>
			<p>“It’s all right, mama!” he said. “It’s all right. I didn’t mean it!” He put his arms around her. She wept, suddenly and bitterly.</p>
			<p>“Nobody ever knew him. He never told us about himself. He was the quiet one. I’ve lost them both now.” Then, drying her eyes, she added:</p>
			<p>“You boys go get something to eat. A little walk will do you good. And, say,” she added, “why don’t you go by <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Citizen</i> office? They ought to be told. They’ve been calling up every day to find out about him.”</p>
			<p>“They thought a lot of that boy,” said Gant.</p>
			<p>They were tired, but they all felt an enormous relief. For over a day, each had known that death was inevitable, and after the horror of the incessant strangling gasp, this peace, this end of pain touched them all with a profound, a weary joy.</p>
			<p>“Well, Ben’s gone,” said Helen slowly. Her eyes were wet, but she wept quietly now, with gentle grief, with love. “I’m glad it’s over. Poor old Ben! I never got to know him until these last few days. He was the best of the lot. Thank God, he’s out of it now.”</p>
			<p>Eugene thought of death now, with love, with joy. Death was like a lovely and tender woman, Ben’s friend and lover, who had come to free him, to heal him, to save him from the torture of life.</p>
			<p>They stood there together, without speaking, in Eliza’s littered kitchen, and their eyes were blind with tears, because they thought of lovely and delicate death, and because they loved one another.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Eugene and Luke went softly up the hall, and out into the dark. Gently, they closed the big front door behind them, and descended the veranda steps. In that enormous silence, birds were waking. It was a little after four o’clock in the morning. Wind pressed the boughs. It was still dark. But above them the thick clouds that had covered the earth for days with a dreary gray blanket had been torn open. Eugene looked up through the deep ragged vault of the sky and saw the proud and splendid stars, bright and unwinking. The withered leaves were shaking.</p>
			<p>A cock crew his shrill morning cry of life beginning and awaking. The cock that crew at midnight (thought Eugene) had an elfin ghostly cry. His crow was drugged with sleep and death: it was like a far horn sounding under sea; and it was a warning to all the men who are about to die, and to the ghosts that must go home.</p>
			<p>But the cock that crows at morning (he thought), has a voice as shrill as any fife. It says, we are done with sleep. We are done with death. O waken, waken into life, says his voice as shrill as any fife. In that enormous silence, birds were waking.</p>
			<p>He heard the cock’s bright minstrelsy again, and by the river in the dark, the great thunder of flanged wheels, and the long retreating wail of the whistle. And slowly, up the chill deserted street, he heard the heavy ringing clangor of shod hoofs. In that enormous silence, life was waking.</p>
			<p>Joy awoke in him, and exultation. They had escaped from the prison of death; they were joined to the bright engine of life again. Life, ruddered life, that would not fail, began its myriad embarkations.</p>
			<p>A paperboy came briskly, with the stiff hobbled limp that Eugene knew so well, down the centre of the street, hurling a blocked paper accurately upon the porch of the Brunswick. As he came opposite Dixieland, he moved in to the curb, tossing his fresh paper with a careful plop. He knew there was sickness in the house.</p>
			<p>The withered leaves were shaking.</p>
			<p>Eugene jumped to the sidewalk from the sodded yard. He stopped the carrier.</p>
			<p>“What’s your name, boy?” he said.</p>
			<p>“Tyson Smathers,” said the boy, turning upon him a steady Scotch-Irish face that was full of life and business.</p>
			<p>“My name is ’Gene Gant. Did you ever hear of me?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Tyson Smathers, “I’ve heard of you. You had number 7.”</p>
			<p>“That was a long time ago,” said Eugene, pompously, grinning. “I was just a boy.”</p>
			<p>In that enormous silence, birds were waking.</p>
			<p>He thrust his hand into a pocket and found a dollar-bill.</p>
			<p>“Here,” he said. “I carried the damn things once. Next to my brother Ben, I was the best boy they ever had. Merry Christmas, Tyson.”</p>
			<p>“It ain’t Christmas yet,” said Tyson Smathers.</p>
			<p>“You’re right, Tyson,” said Eugene, “but it will be.”</p>
			<p>Tyson Smathers took the money, with a puzzled, freckled grin. Then he went on down the street, throwing papers.</p>
			<p>The maples were thin and sere. Their rotting leaves covered the ground. But the trees were not leafless yet. The leaves were quaking. Some birds began to chatter in the trees. Wind pressed the boughs, the withered leaves were shaking. It was October.</p>
			<p>As Luke and Eugene turned up the street toward town, a woman came out of the big brick house across the street, and over the yard toward them. When she got near, they saw she was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pert. It was October, but some birds were waking.</p>
			<p>“Luke,” she said fuzzily. “Luke? Is it Old Luke?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Luke.</p>
			<p>“And ’Gene? Is it Old ’Gene?” She laughed gently, patting his hand, peering comically at him with her bleared oaken eyes, and swaying back and forth gravely, with alcoholic dignity. The leaves, the withered leaves, were shaking, quaking. It was October, and the leaves were shaking.</p>
			<p>“They ran old Fatty away, ’Gene,” she said. “They won’t let her come in the house any more. They ran her away because she liked Old Ben. Ben. Old Ben.” She swayed gently, vaguely collecting her thought. “Old Ben. How’s Old Ben, ’Gene?” she coaxed. “Fatty wants to know.”</p>
			<p>“I’m m-m-m-mighty sorry, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> P-P-P-Pert⁠ ⁠…” Luke began.</p>
			<p>Wind pressed the boughs, the withered leaves were quaking.</p>
			<p>“Ben’s dead,” said Eugene.</p>
			<p>She stared at him for a moment, swaying on her feet.</p>
			<p>“Fatty liked Ben,” she said gently, in a moment. “Fatty and Old Ben were friends.”</p>
			<p>She turned and started unsteadily across the street, holding one hand out gravely, for balance.</p>
			<p>In that enormous silence, birds were waking. It was October, but some birds were waking.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Then Luke and Eugene walked swiftly townward, filled with great joy because they heard the sounds of life and daybreak. And as they walked, they spoke often of Ben, with laughter, with old pleasant memory, speaking of him not as of one who had died, but as of a brother who had been gone for years, and was returning home. They spoke of him with triumph and tenderness, as of one who had defeated pain, and had joyously escaped. Eugene’s mind groped awkwardly about. It fumbled like a child, with little things.</p>
			<p>They were filled with a deep and tranquil affection for each other: they talked without constraint, without affectation, with quiet confidence and knowledge.</p>
			<p>“Do you remember,” Luke began, “the t-t-t-time he cut the hair of Aunt Pett’s orphan boy⁠—Marcus?”</p>
			<p>“He⁠—used⁠—a chamberpot⁠—to trim the edges,” Eugene screamed, waking the street with wild laughter.</p>
			<p>They walked along hilariously, greeting a few early pedestrians with ironical obsequiousness, jeering pleasantly at the world in brotherly alliance. Then they entered the relaxed and weary offices of the paper which Ben had served so many years, and gave their stick of news to the tired man there.</p>
			<p>There was regret, a sense of wonder, in that office where the swift record of so many days had died⁠—a memory that would not die, of something strange and passing.</p>
			<p>“Damn! I’m sorry! He was a great boy!” said the men.</p>
			<p>As light broke grayly in the empty streets, and the first car rattled up to town, they entered the little beanery where he had spent, in smoke and coffee, so many hours of daybreak.</p>
			<p>Eugene looked in and saw them there, assembled as they had been many years before, like the nightmare ratification of a prophecy: McGuire, Coker, the weary counterman, and, at the lower end, the pressman, Harry Tugman.</p>
			<p>Luke and Eugene entered, and sat down at the counter.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” said Luke sonorously.</p>
			<p>“Hello, Luke,” barked McGuire. “Do you think you’ll ever have any sense? How are you, son? How’s school?” he said to Eugene. He stared at them for a moment, his wet cigarette plastered comically on his full sag lip, his bleared eyes kindly and drunken.</p>
			<p>“General, how’s the boy? What’re you drinking these days⁠—turpentine or varnish?” said the sailor, tweaking him roughly in his larded ribs. McGuire grunted.</p>
			<p>“Is it over, son?” said Coker quietly.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Eugene.</p>
			<p>Coker took the long cigar from his mouth and grinned malarially at the boy.</p>
			<p>“Feel better, don’t you, son?” he said.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Eugene. “A hell of a lot.”</p>
			<p>“Well, Eugenics,” said the sailor briskly, “what are you eating?”</p>
			<p>“What’s the man got?” said Eugene, staring at the greasy card. “Have you got any young roast whale left?”</p>
			<p>“No,” said the counterman. “We did have some, but we run out.”</p>
			<p>“How about the fricasseed bull?” said Luke. “Have you got any of that?”</p>
			<p>“You don’t need anyone to fricassee your bull, son,” said McGuire. “You’ve got plenty as it is.”</p>
			<p>Their bull-laughter bellowed in the beanery.</p>
			<p>With puckered forehead, Luke stuttered over the menu.</p>
			<p>“F-f-f-fried chicken à la Maryland,” he muttered. “A la Maryland?” he repeated as if puzzled. “Now, ain’t that nice?” he said, looking around with mincing daintiness.</p>
			<p>“Bring me one of your this week’s steaks,” said Eugene, “well done, with a meat-axe and the sausage-grinder.”</p>
			<p>“What do you want the sausage-grinder for, son?” said Coker.</p>
			<p>“That’s for the mince pie,” said Eugene.</p>
			<p>“Make it two,” said Luke, “with a coupla cups of Mock-a, just like mother still makes.”</p>
			<p>He looked crazily around at Eugene, and burst into loud whah-whahs, prodding him in the ribs.</p>
			<p>“Where they got you stationed now, Luke?” said Harry Tugman, peering up snoutily from a mug of coffee.</p>
			<p>“At the p-p-p-present time in Norfolk at the Navy Base,” Luke answered, “m-m-making the world safe for hypocrisy.”</p>
			<p>“Do you ever get out to sea, son?” said Coker.</p>
			<p>“Sure!” said Luke. “A f-f-five-cent ride on the streetcar brings me right out to the beach.”</p>
			<p>“That boy has had the makings of a sailor in him ever since he wet the bed,” said McGuire. “I predicted it long ago.”</p>
			<p>Horse Hines came in briskly, but checked himself when he saw the two young men.</p>
			<p>“Look out!” whispered the sailor to Eugene, with a crazy grin. “You’re next! He’s got his fishy eye glued on you. He’s already getting you measured up for one.”</p>
			<p>Eugene looked angrily around at Horse Hines, muttering. The sailor chortled madly.</p>
			<p>“Good morning, gentlemen,” said Horse Hines, in an accent of refined sadness. “Boys,” he said, coming up to them sorrowfully, “I was mighty sorry to hear of your trouble. I couldn’t have thought more of that boy if he’d been my own brother.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t go on, Horse,” said McGuire, holding up four fat fingers of protest. “We can see you’re heartbroken. If you go on, you may get hysterical with your grief, and break right out laughing. We couldn’t bear that, Horse. We’re big strong men, but we’ve had hard lives. I beg of you to spare us, Horse.”</p>
			<p>Horse Hines did not notice him.</p>
			<p>“I’ve got him over at the place now,” he said softly. “I want you boys to come in later in the day to see him. You won’t know he’s the same person when I’m through.”</p>
			<p>“God! An improvement over nature,” said Coker. “His mother will appreciate it.”</p>
			<p>“Is this an undertaking shop you’re running, Horse,” said McGuire, “or a beauty parlor?”</p>
			<p>“We know you’ll d-d-do your best, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hines,” said the sailor with ready earnest insincerity. “That’s the reason the family got you.”</p>
			<p>“Ain’t you goin’ to eat the rest of your steak?” said the counterman to Eugene.</p>
			<p>“Steak! Steak! It’s not steak!” muttered Eugene. “I know what it is now.” He got off the stool and walked over to Coker. “Can you save me? Am I going to die? Do I look sick, Coker?” he said in a hoarse mutter.</p>
			<p>“No, son,” said Coker. “Not sick⁠—crazy.”</p>
			<p>Horse Hines took his seat at the other end of the counter. Eugene, leaning upon the greasy marble counter, began to sing:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Hey, ho, the carrion crow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Derry, derry, derry, derr⁠—oh!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Shut up, you damn fool!” said the sailor in a hoarse whisper, grinning.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“A carrion crow sat on a rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Derry, derry, derry, derr⁠—oh!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Outside, in the young gray light, there was a brisk wakening of life. A streetcar curved slowly into the avenue, the motorman leaning from his window and shifting the switch carefully with a long rod, blowing the warm fog of his breath into the chill air. Patrolman Leslie Roberts, sallow and liverish, slouched by anaemically, swinging his club. The negro man-of-all-work for Wood’s Pharmacy walked briskly into the post-office to collect the morning mail. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. T.</abbr> Stearns, the railway passenger-agent, waited on the curb across the street for the depot car. He had a red face, and he was reading the morning paper.</p>
			<p>“There they go!” Eugene cried suddenly. “As if they didn’t know about it!”</p>
			<p>“Luke,” said Harry Tugman, looking up from his paper, “I was certainly sorry to hear about Ben. He was one fine boy.” Then he went back to his sheet.</p>
			<p>“By God!” said Eugene. “This is news!”</p>
			<p>He burst into a fit of laughter, gasping and uncontrollable, which came from him with savage violence. Horse Hines glanced craftily up at him. Then he went back to his paper.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The two young men left the lunchroom and walked homeward through the brisk morning. Eugene’s mind kept fumbling with little things. There was a frosty snap and clatter of life upon the streets, the lean rattle of wheels, the creak of blinds, a cold rose-tint of pearled sky. In the Square, the motormen stood about among their cars, in loud foggy gossip. At Dixieland, there was an air of exhaustion, of nervous depletion. The house slept; Eliza alone was stirring, but she had a smart fire crackling in the range, and was full of business.</p>
			<p>“You children go and sleep now. We’ve all got work to do later in the day.”</p>
			<p>Luke and Eugene went into the big dining-room which Eliza had converted into a bedroom.</p>
			<p>“D-d-d-damn if I’m going to sleep upstairs,” said the sailor angrily. “Not after this!”</p>
			<p>“Pshaw!” said Eliza. “That’s only superstition. It wouldn’t bother me a bit.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The brothers slept heavily until past noon. Then they went out again to see Horse Hines. They found him with his legs comfortably disposed on the desk of his dark little office, with its odor of weeping ferns, and incense, and old carnations.</p>
			<p>He got up quickly as they entered, with a starchy crackle of his hard boiled shirt, and a solemn rustle of his black garments. Then he began to speak to them in a hushed voice, bending forward slightly.</p>
			<p>How like Death this man is (thought Eugene). He thought of the awful mysteries of burial⁠—the dark ghoul-ritual, the obscene communion with the dead, touched with some black and foul witch-magic. Where is the can in which they throw the parts? There is a restaurant near here. Then he took the cold phthisic hand, freckled on its back, that the man extended, with a sense of having touched something embalmed. The undertaker’s manner had changed since the morning: it had become official, professional. He was the alert marshal of their grief, the efficient master-of-ceremonies. Subtly he made them feel there was an order and decorum in death: a ritual of mourning that must be observed. They were impressed.</p>
			<p>“We thought we’d like to s-s-s-see you f-f-f-first, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hines, about the c-c-c-c-casket,” Luke whispered nervously. “We’re going to ask your advice. We want you to help us find something appropriate.”</p>
			<p>Horse Hines nodded with grave approval. Then he led them softly back, into a large dark room with polished waxen floors where, amid a rich dead smell of wood and velvet, upon wheeled trestles, the splendid coffins lay in their proud menace.</p>
			<p>“Now,” said Horse Hines quietly, “I know the family doesn’t want anything cheap.”</p>
			<p>“No, sir!” said the sailor positively. “We want the b-b-b-best you have.”</p>
			<p>“I take a personal interest in this funeral,” said Horse Hines with gentle emotion. “I have known the Gant and Pentland families for thirty years or more. I have had business dealings with your father for nigh on to twenty years.”</p>
			<p>“And I w-w-want you to know, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hines, that the f-f-f-family appreciates the interest you’re taking in this,” said the sailor very earnestly.</p>
			<p>He likes this, Eugene thought. The affection of the world. He must have it.</p>
			<p>“Your father,” continued Horse Hines, “is one of the oldest and most respected business men in the community. And the Pentland family is one of the wealthiest and most prominent.”</p>
			<p>Eugene was touched with a moment’s glow of pride.</p>
			<p>“You don’t want anything shoddy,” said Horse Hines. “I know that. What you get ought to be in good taste and have dignity. Am I right?”</p>
			<p>Luke nodded emphatically.</p>
			<p>“That’s the way we feel about it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hines. We want the best you have. We’re not pinching p-p-p-pennies where Ben’s concerned,” he said proudly.</p>
			<p>“Well, then,” said Horse Hines, “I’ll give you my honest opinion. I could give you this one cheap,” he placed his hand upon one of the caskets, “but I don’t think it’s what you want. Of course,” he said, “it’s good at the price. It’s worth the money. It’ll give you service, don’t worry. You’ll get value out of it⁠—”</p>
			<p>Now there’s an idea, thought Eugene.</p>
			<p>“They’re all good, Luke. I haven’t got a bad piece of stock in the place. But⁠—”</p>
			<p>“We want something b-b-b-better,” said Luke earnestly. He turned to Eugene. “Don’t you think so, ’Gene?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Eugene.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Horse Hines, “I could sell you this one,” he indicated the most sumptuous casket in the room. “They don’t come better than that, Luke. That’s the top. She’s worth every dollar I ask for her.”</p>
			<p>“All right,” said Luke. “You’re the judge. If that’s the best you’ve g-g-g-got, we’ll take it.”</p>
			<p>No, no! thought Eugene. You mustn’t interrupt. Let him go on.</p>
			<p>“But,” said Horse Hines relentlessly, “there’s no need for you to take that one, either. What you’re after, Luke, is dignity and simplicity. Is that right?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the sailor meekly, “I guess you’re right at that, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hines.”</p>
			<p>Now we’ll have it, thought Eugene. This man takes joy in his work.</p>
			<p>“Well, then,” said Horse Hines decisively, “I was going to suggest to you boys that you take this one.” He put his hand affectionately upon a handsome casket at his side.</p>
			<p>“This is neither too plain nor too fancy. It’s simple and in good taste. Silver handles, you see⁠—silver plate here for the name. You can’t go wrong on this one. It’s a good buy. She’ll give you value for every dollar you put into it.”</p>
			<p>They walked around the coffin, staring at it critically.</p>
			<p>After a moment, Luke said nervously:</p>
			<p>“How⁠—wh-wh-wh-what’s the price of this one?”</p>
			<p>“That sells for $450,” said Horse Hines. “But,” he added, after a moment’s dark reflection, “I’ll tell you what I’ll do. Your father and I are old friends. Out of respect for the family, I’ll let you have it at cost⁠—$375.”</p>
			<p>“What do you say, ’Gene?” the sailor asked. “Does it look all right to you?”</p>
			<p>Do your Christmas shopping early.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Eugene, “let’s take it. I wish there were another color. I don’t like black,” he added. “Haven’t you got any other color?”</p>
			<p>Horse Hines stared at him a moment.</p>
			<p>“Black <em>is</em> the color,” he said.</p>
			<p>Then, after a moment’s silence, he went on:</p>
			<p>“Would you boys care to see the body?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” they said.</p>
			<p>He led them on tiptoe down the aisle of the coffins, and opened a door to a room behind. It was dark. They entered and stood with caught breath. Horse Hines switched on a light and closed the door.</p>
			<p>Ben, clad in his best suit of clothes, a neat one of dark gray-black, lay in rigid tranquillity upon a table. His hands, cold and white, with clean dry nails, withered a little like an old apple, were crossed loosely on his stomach. He had been closely shaved: he was immaculately groomed. The rigid head was thrust sharply upward, with a ghastly counterfeit of a smile: there was a little gum of wax at the nostrils, and a waxen lacing between the cold firm lips. The mouth was tight, somewhat bulging. It looked fuller than it ever had looked before.</p>
			<p>There was a faint indefinably cloying odor.</p>
			<p>The sailor looked with superstition, nervously, with puckered forehead. Then he whispered to Eugene:</p>
			<p>“I g-g-guess that’s Ben, all right.”</p>
			<p>Because, Eugene thought, it is not Ben, and we are lost. He looked at the cold bright carrion, that bungling semblance which had not even the power of a good waxwork to suggest its image. Nothing of Ben could be buried here. In this poor stuffed crow, with its pathetic barbering, and its neat buttons, nothing of the owner had been left. All that was there was the tailoring of Horse Hines, who now stood by, watchfully, hungry for their praise.</p>
			<p>No, this is not Ben (Eugene thought). No trace of him is left in this deserted shell. It bears no mark of him. Where has he gone? Is this his bright particular flesh, made in his image, given life by his unique gesture, by his one soul? No, he is gone from that bright flesh. This thing is one with all carrion; it will be mixed with the earth again. Ben? Where? O lost!</p>
			<p>The sailor, looking, said:</p>
			<p>“That b-b-b-boy sure suffered.” Suddenly, turning his face away into his hand, he sobbed briefly and painfully, his confused stammering life drawn out of its sprawl into a moment of hard grief.</p>
			<p>Eugene wept, not because he saw Ben there, but because Ben had gone, and because he remembered all the tumult and the pain.</p>
			<p>“It is over now,” said Horse Hines gently. “He is at peace.”</p>
			<p>“By God, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Hines,” said the sailor earnestly, as he wiped his eyes on his jacket, “that was one g-g-great boy.”</p>
			<p>Horse Hines looked raptly at the cold strange face.</p>
			<p>“A fine boy,” he murmured as his fisheye fell tenderly on his work. “And I have tried to do him justice.”</p>
			<p>They were silent for a moment, looking.</p>
			<p>“You’ve d-d-done a fine job,” said the sailor. “I’ve got to hand it to you. What do you say, ’Gene?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Eugene, in a small choking voice. “Yes.”</p>
			<p>“He’s a b-b-b-bit p-p-p-pale, don’t you think?” the sailor stammered, barely conscious of what he was saying.</p>
			<p>“Just a moment!” said Horse Hines quickly, lifting a finger. Briskly he took a stick of rouge from his pocket, stepped forward, and deftly, swiftly, sketched upon the dead gray cheeks a ghastly rose-hued mockery of life and health.</p>
			<p>“There!” he said, with deep satisfaction; and, rouge-stick in hand, head critically cocked, like a painter before his canvas, he stepped back into the terrible staring prison of their horror.</p>
			<p>“There are artists, boys, in every profession,” Horse Hines continued in a moment, with quiet pride, “and though I do say it myself, Luke, I’m proud of my work on this job. Look at him!” he exclaimed with sudden energy, and a bit of color in his gray face. “Did you ever see anything more natural in your life?”</p>
			<p>Eugene turned upon the man a grim and purple stare, noting with pity, with a sort of tenderness, as the dogs of laughter tugged at his straining throat the earnestness and pride in the long horse-face.</p>
			<p>“Look at it!” said Horse Hines again in slow wonder. “I’ll never beat that again! Not if I live to be a million! That’s art, boys!”</p>
			<p>A slow strangling gurgle escaped from Eugene’s screwed lips. The sailor looked quickly at him, with a crazy suppressed smile.</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter?” he said warningly. “Don’t, fool!” His grin broke loose.</p>
			<p>Eugene staggered across the floor and collapsed upon a chair, roaring with laughter while his long arms flapped helplessly at his sides.</p>
			<p>“Scuse!” he gasped. “Don’t mean to⁠—A-r-rt! Yes! Yes! That’s it!” he screamed, and he beat his knuckles in a crazy tattoo upon the polished floor. He slid gently off the chair, slowly unbuttoning his vest, and with a languid hand loosening his necktie. A faint gurgle came from his weary throat, his head lolled around on the floor languidly, tears coursed down his swollen features.</p>
			<p>“What’s wrong with you? Are you c-c-c-crazy?” said the sailor, all a-grin.</p>
			<p>Horse Hines bent sympathetically and assisted the boy to his feet.</p>
			<p>“It’s the strain,” he said knowingly to the sailor. “The pore fellow has become hysterical.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
